# TFBS evolution

We recapitulated some of the motif-binding analyses from Kapheim et al. (2015). That study found that single-copy orthologs tended to have greater stubb scores associated with the promoter region as social complexity increased. This finding suggested a greater ability to regulate a greater number of genes in more social taxa.

We followed the methodology from that study here, making use of the same 223 binding motifs. For each of these motifs, a stubb score was calculated for each 500 base window in every genome, with a step size of 250 bases. For each motif for every species represented in each orthologous group, we then identified the window with the greatest stubb score within 5kb upstream and 2kb downstream of the transcription start site and assigned that score to that gene for that species. Then, for a given species and a given motif, the motif scores were rank-normalized (best score = 1, worst score = 0). We forewent the GC-normalization and p-value calculation used previously, performing analyses on these rank scores.

For every orthogroup and every motif, we examined correlations between stubb score and social behavior using PGLS. We first removed all socially polymorphic taxa. These analyses were performed on the phylogeny generated by RAxML on a concatenated matrix of all single-copy protein sequences. The results of all PGLS tests done are in `motif_pgls_nopoly_anc` for tests including ancestrally solitary species, and `motif_pgls_nopoly_noanc` for tests excluding these taxa.

In order to consider the correlation of a particular motif and orthogroup with social behavior, we required that the normalized rank of that motif be at least 0.95 in at least one species. Ranks of 0.95 or greater indicate that the stubb score for that particular motif is in the highest 5% among the 7,102 genes considered across the genome, indicating that these sequences are the most likely to actually be recognized and used by TF's to modulate expression. We also required that the number of significant correlations of a motif with sociality in either direction be at least five.

For each motif, we then counted the numbers of significant (p < 0.01) correlations detected with higher stubb scores in social taxa and with higher stubb scores in solitary taxa. Only counting those motifs for which there were differences in numbers of significant correlations between social and solitary taxa of at least 20%, there were 94 motifs with more positive correlations with social taxa and 29 motifs with more positive correlations with solitary taxa. 

This appears to be a large difference in the number of motifs positively correlated with social behavior and positively correlated with solitary behavior. We determined the significance of this result using a permutation test. We reran the PGLS analyses 100 times using six (of 15) randomly chosen species as foreground (social) taxa. Only two of these permutations yielded at least 94 motifs with more positive correlations in these foreground taxa. None yielded differences between the number of motifs with more positive correlations with social behavior and more positive correlations with solitary behavior as or more extreme than our result (94-29 = 65). Therefore, the pattern found appears to be significantly more extreme than expected by chance.

Exploring a variety of other reasonable parameters yields similar results. This includes increasing stringency of the minimum number of significant correlations (in any direction) required to consider a motif to 10, increasing the minimum score to 0.99, decreasing the required p-value of the PGLS results to 0.001.

Results and permutation tests over a large range of possible parameters are in `motif_permutation_tests.txt`.

### Which motifs?

Taking the same parameters as for the main analysis above, we see a few interesting TFBSs that are positively correlated with social behavior, though since there are 94, that is 42% of all TFBSs checked so may not be that informative. However, they include lola_PQ_SOLEXA, h_SOLEXA_5, CrebA_SOLEXA, CG5180_SOLEXA, and tai_Met_SOLEXA_5, 5 of the 11 motifs associated with social evolution in Kapheim et al. (2015) (see their Table 1). Lists of the motifs with more positive correlations with social and solitary taxa across the full set of parameters explored are in `motif_syntheses/`.

### Genes of interest?

While the PGLS results show which genes are positively correlated with motif scores, you cannot look at these in isolation because all genes were tested but only those with at least one score greater than 0.95 were actually analyzed. The rank scores are in `stubb_compiled_5kup2kdown`. All genes that are significantly positively correlated with social behavior (where at least one taxon has a stubb score of 0.95) are in `sig_genes`. There are also `Pair_consistency` columns indicating whether all pairs of social/solitary taxa have higher scores in the social species ("pairwise" = consistent, "pairfail" = not consistent). `Behavior_means` indicates the ranking of the mean stubb scores for each behavioral group. "alc" indicates that ancestrally solitary taxa have the lowest mean stubb score, ancestrally social solitary taxa have the middlest mean stubb score, and social taxa have the highest mean stubb scores. The means for these three classes are then listed.

### Loss or gain of motifs

Unclear from this analysis is how much of the signal is due to a gain of motifs in the social species versus a loss of motifs in reversions to solitary behavior. Therefore, I also removed the three ancestrally solitary species and reran the whole analysis. While there are still more positive correlations with social taxa (75) than solitary taxa (52) using the same parameters as for the main analysis above, the permutation test is not significant (p = 0.32 for social motifs and p = 0.31 for differences). This seems likely due in large part to the very small sample at this stage. Only 12 species remain in the dataset, half of which are designated as foreground in the permutation tests.

### GO enrichment

Even though there are more genes with significant correlations with social species (10087) than with solitary species (8715) across all motifs (nopoly_anc_p0.01_min0.95_soc1_sol1_mar0.2_count5), GO terms are significantly enriched in more cases in solitary taxa. Using a GO term hypergeometric p cutoff of 0.01, there are 1457 instances of significant enrichment in the social species correlations and 1538 instances of significant enrichment in the solitary species correlations. There seem to be more instances of immune enrichment in the social correlations (38) than solitary (18) (`egrep "immun|wound|leukocyte|STAT" go_counts_p0.01_all.txt`). The pattern holds (with less strength) when we increase the GO enrichment p cutoff to 0.05 (soc: 78 and sol: 61). I thought that the same might apply to nervous-system related things but this is not the case (`egrep "dend|axon|neur|nerv|learn|memor|synap|behav" go_counts_p0.01_all.txt`) as there are 84 for social correlations and 85 for solitary correlations. With a p cutoff of 0.05 the numbers of 274 for soc and 258 for sol. 

Counts of GO enrichments are in `go_counts_p[p-cutoff]_[motifs].txt`. `all` indicates that all motifs were used. `soc` indicates that only the 94 with a greater number of significant correlations with social behavior are included and `sol` is those 29 with more correlations with solitary behavior. The format of these files is that the first column is the GO number, the second column is the number of times that GO was enriched in the genes significantly correlated with social behavior, and the third column is the number of times that GO was enriched in the genes significantly correlated with solitary behavior. In addition, GO enrichments for all motifs are in `go_enrichment`.

### Fab 4 motifs

The four genes with convergent signals of selection on the two origin branches (aBSREL) and relaxed selection on the solitary tips are of particular interest.

The way that I did the main motif analysis (and the way that it was done in Kapheim et al.) is to require that some taxa have a minimum binding score to actually test for a correlation. In our case, I just required that a single taxon had at least a rank of 0.95. A handful of motifs are significantly correlated with binding strengths in these genes.

In OG_11519, CG14962_SOLEXA_5 is negatively correlated with sociality (p < 0.01).

In OG_13369 (apolpp), Aef1_SOLEXA_5, CG4360_F1_3_SOLEXA_2.5, Achi_SOLEXA, and C15_SOLEXA are positively correlated with sociality (p < 0.01) and CG11723_SOLEXA, pfk_SOLEXA, Sox14_SOLEXA, and vri_SOLEXA are negatively correlated with sociality.

In OG_14553 (Pat1), CG8765_SOLEXA and cnc_maf_s_SELEX are negatively correlated with sociality.

In OG_14622 (Hex110), ac_da_SOLEXA_5 and HLH4C_SOLEXA_5 are positively correlateid with sociality.

